posts/Sanne/2015-07-13-hibernate-search-54CR1.adoc, before:

= Hibernate Search is ready for Hibernate ORM 5
Sanne Grinovero
:awestruct-tags: [ "Hibernate Search" ]
:awestruct-layout: blog-post
---
Hibernate Search version `5.4.0.CR1` is now available! It was built and tested with Hibernate ORM `5.0.0.CR2`,
essentially it's all ready for ORM 5 and we'll just be waiting for this to be marked `Final`.

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.hibernate</groupId>
    <artifactId>hibernate-search-orm</artifactId>
    <version>5.4.0.CR1</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.hibernate</groupId>
    <artifactId>hibernate-core</artifactId>
    <version>5.0.0.CR2</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.hibernate</groupId>
    <artifactId>hibernate-entitymanager</artifactId>
    <version>5.0.0.CR2</version>
</dependency>
----

== Great improvements in the JMS backend

=== Transactional JMS backend

As explained in more detail in http://in.relation.to/2015/07/09/hibernate-search-jms-transaction/[last week's post],
Hibernate Search now provides an option to include its indexing operations within the same transaction as the RDBMS.

See also the http://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/search/5.4/reference/en-US/html_single/#search-architecture-jms[JMS Architecture documentation]
and the http://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/search/5.4/reference/en-US/html_single/#jms-backend[JMS slave nodes configuration properties].

In short, it's enabled by setting this property:
[source]
----
hibernate.search.worker.enlist_in_transaction=true
----
But keep in mind: it's a global setting! If you want to use it, all your backends shall be set to use an
XA enabled, transactional JMS queue.

Please let us know if you have a great use case which would require us to allow some form of mixed mode.

=== The JMS message header JMSXGroupID

Hibernate Search will now use the specific `JMSXGroupID` message header and set it to the index name.
That will allow users of the JMS backend to take advantage of *message grouping*.

== Modules versions and running in WildFly

The first WildFly version to use Hibernate ORM 5 is version `10.0.0.Alpha5`,
which was released the past weekend.
So the JBoss Modules we create for this appserver are targeting now WildFly 10,
but at least version `10.0.0.Alpha5`.

== Where to download it from

Everything you need is available on Hibernate Search's http://hibernate.org/search/[web site].
Download the https://sourceforge.net/projects/hibernate/files/hibernate-search/5.4.0.CR1[full distribution from here],
or get it from Maven Central, and don't hesitate to reach us in our https://forums.hibernate.org/viewforum.php?f=9[forums]

Commit message:

Edit previous post to also mention the MassIndexer timeout improvements

posts/Sanne/2015-07-13-hibernate-search-54CR1.adoc, after:

= Hibernate Search is ready for Hibernate ORM 5
Sanne Grinovero
:awestruct-tags: [ "Hibernate Search" ]
:awestruct-layout: blog-post
---
Hibernate Search version `5.4.0.CR1` is now available! It was built and tested with Hibernate ORM `5.0.0.CR2`,
essentially it's all ready for ORM 5 and we'll just be waiting for this to be marked `Final`.

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.hibernate</groupId>
    <artifactId>hibernate-search-orm</artifactId>
    <version>5.4.0.CR1</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.hibernate</groupId>
    <artifactId>hibernate-core</artifactId>
    <version>5.0.0.CR2</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.hibernate</groupId>
    <artifactId>hibernate-entitymanager</artifactId>
    <version>5.0.0.CR2</version>
</dependency>
----

== No longer timeouts when using the MassIndexer in a container

You can now have the `MassIndexer` set a different timeout for the internal transactions it will start,
so if you're running Hibernate Search in a container like WildFly you no longer have to make a choice
between having a deadline of 5 minutes or changing the default timeout of the whole container.

[source,java]
----
fullTextSession
   .createIndexer( User.class )
   .transactionTimeout( 1800 ) //seconds
   .startAndWait();
----

== Great improvements in the JMS backend

=== Transactional JMS backend

As explained in more detail in http://in.relation.to/2015/07/09/hibernate-search-jms-transaction/[last week's post],
Hibernate Search now provides an option to include its indexing operations within the same transaction as the RDBMS.

See also the http://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/search/5.4/reference/en-US/html_single/#search-architecture-jms[JMS Architecture documentation]
and the http://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/search/5.4/reference/en-US/html_single/#jms-backend[JMS slave nodes configuration properties].

In short, it's enabled by setting this property:
[source]
----
hibernate.search.worker.enlist_in_transaction=true
----
But keep in mind: it's a global setting! If you want to use it, all your backends shall be set to use an
XA enabled, transactional JMS queue.

Please let us know if you have a great use case which would require us to allow some form of mixed mode.

=== The JMS message header JMSXGroupID

Hibernate Search will now use the specific `JMSXGroupID` message header and set it to the index name.
That will allow users of the JMS backend to take advantage of *message grouping*.

== Modules versions and running in WildFly

The first WildFly version to use Hibernate ORM 5 is version `10.0.0.Alpha5`,
which was released the past weekend.
So the JBoss Modules we create for this appserver are targeting now WildFly 10,
but at least version `10.0.0.Alpha5`.

== Where to download it from

Everything you need is available on Hibernate Search's http://hibernate.org/search/[web site].
Download the https://sourceforge.net/projects/hibernate/files/hibernate-search/5.4.0.CR1[full distribution from here],
or get it from Maven Central, and don't hesitate to reach us in our https://forums.hibernate.org/viewforum.php?f=9[forums]
