posts/Sanne/2016-11-08-hibernate-ogm-with-hotrod-support.adoc, before:

= "Hibernate OGM now supports Infinispan datagrid over Hot Rod"
Sanne Grinovero
:awestruct-tags: [ "Hibernate OGM", "Releases", "Infinispan"]
:awestruct-layout: blog-post
---

Today we release http://hibernate.org/ogm/[Hibernate OGM] `5.1.0.Beta1` and `5.0.3.Final`.

In version 5.1 we introduce an amazing new feature: support for storing data in http://infinispan.org/docs/8.2.x/infinispan_server_guide/infinispan_server_guide.html[_Infinispan Server_]
using the http://infinispan.org/hotrod-clients/[Java Hot Rod client], encoding your data into https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/[_Google Protobuffers_],
while handling all the nasty mapping automatically.

== Hot Rod support?

_Hot Rod_ is the protocol used by "intelligent clients" of an Infinispan Server, which implies
the client is smart enough to implement a series of performance optimisation tricks; for example
it is able to connect to the most suited server in the cluster depending on the data
being requested (or written), greatly reducing the latency of operations.

While Infinispan is most known as an high-performance key/value store, when it comes to remote
clients the recommended approach is to encode your data in Google Protobuffers.
This allows for evolution of your storage schema without breaking decoding of existing
data, allows server side queries and functions to interpret the stored data, and allows
interoperability with Hot Rod clients from other programming languages.
It allows for example to read the POJOs we write using the Java client from a Python client, and
have the data converted into reasonable Python Objects.

Unfortunately dealing with an Hot Rod client can be tedious!

* It's a key-value store: manual handling of relations is error prone
* You'll need to write and maintain a matching Protobuf Schema for all your entities
* You'll have to setup Protostream and configure it as Marshaller for the Hot Rod client

Most importantly, it requires new skills.

You'll have to learn how a Protobuf Schema is best defined, and how to use Protostream.
Finally, you'll have to learn the Hot Rod API and how to make the most of its
advanced flags to tune each operation, and consider carefully how you want to represent relations.

=== Use something familiar instead?

Hibernate OGM can automate the tedious parts, and let you focus on what matters.

==== Add this dependency:

[source, XML]
[subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.hibernate.ogm</groupId>
    <artifactId>hibernate-ogm-infinispan</artifactId>
    <version>5.1.0.Beta1</version>
</dependency>
----

==== Enable OGM's Hot Rod super powers in your persistence.xml :

====
[source, XML]
----
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<persistence xmlns="http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/persistence"
	xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
	xsi:schemaLocation="http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/persistence http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/persistence/persistence_2_0.xsd"
	version="2.0">

	<persistence-unit name="ogm-with-hotrod">
		<provider>org.hibernate.ogm.jpa.HibernateOgmPersistence</provider> # <1>
		<properties>
			<property name="hibernate.ogm.datastore.provider"
				value="infinispan_remote" /> # <2>
			<property name="hibernate.ogm.infinispan_remote.client.server_list"
				value="127.0.0.1:11222" /> # <3>
		</properties>
	</persistence-unit>
</persistence>
----
<1> Choose Hibernate OGM as JPA Provider
<2> pick `infinispan_remote` as datastore
<3> include Hot Rod configuration properties, just replacing/adding the OGM prefix.
====

==== Start Hibernate OGM!

====
[source, Java]
----
EntityManagerFactory emf = Persistence.createEntityManagerFactory("ogm-with-hotrod");
----
====

That's enough to create Hibernate `EntityManager`s which knows how to perform CRUD of your model,
encoding and decoding your data into Hot Rod!

This will:

 * Start and manage the Hot Rod client, have it initialize connections to your _Infinispan Server_
 * Generate an appropriate Protobuf Schema for your model
 * Deploy the schema to the _Infinispan Server_
 * Initialize all the internal Protobuf encoders and decoders using Protostream
 * Properly implement sequences / autoincrements (a feature lacking in native Hot Rod)

There are some limitations.

The most notable one is that you will have to manually create
the Cache definitions that it will need on your _Infinispan Server_ configuration, as
at this time this is an operation which can't be performed over Hot Rod (but the frienfly
Infinispan team is working on a solution).

Another limitation is that at this time we don't suppor running JPQL queries on this backend.

You can find many more interesting details on our https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/ogm/5.1/reference/en-US/html/ch09.html[Infinispan integration reference guide]; I've included a section to help you choose between Infinispan Embedded
and Infinispan Remote (over Hot Rod).

=== Hibernate OGM 5.0.3.Final

We also released Hibernate OGM version `5.0.3.Final`, to address a single mapping issue:
many thanks to Simone Manetti for http://stackoverflow.com/questions/40288481/persist-a-tree-with-hibernate-ogm-and-mongodb-the-collections-that-represent-th[reporting] https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/OGM-1198[OGM-1198], now resolved in this version.

If you need to upgrade from a version before 5.0, you can find help on the
https://developer.jboss.org/wiki/HibernateOGMMigrationNotes[migration notes].

== What's next?

Version 5.1 is feature complete now. We're looking forward for your feedback!

==== How can I get in touch?

You can find us through the following channels:

* https://forum.hibernate.org/viewforum.php?f=31[User forum]
* https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/OGM[Issue tracker]
* http://lists.jboss.org/pipermail/hibernate-dev/[Mailing list]
* http://stackoverflow.com[Stack Overflow]: we monitor the tag _hibernate-ogm_
* https://www.hipchat.com/gXEjW5Wgg[HipChat]: Hibernate OGM hipchat room

Commit message:

Applying feedback on the OGM release post

posts/Sanne/2016-11-08-hibernate-ogm-with-hotrod-support.adoc, after:

= "Hibernate OGM now supports Infinispan datagrid over Hot Rod"
Sanne Grinovero
:awestruct-tags: [ "Hibernate OGM", "Releases", "Infinispan"]
:awestruct-layout: blog-post
---

Today we release http://hibernate.org/ogm/[Hibernate OGM] `5.1.0.Beta1` and `5.0.3.Final`.

In version 5.1 we introduce an amazing new feature: support for storing data in http://infinispan.org/docs/8.2.x/infinispan_server_guide/infinispan_server_guide.html[_Infinispan Server_]
using the http://infinispan.org/hotrod-clients/[Java Hot Rod client], encoding your data into https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/[_Google Protobuffers_],
while handling all the nasty mapping automatically.

== Hot Rod support?

_Hot Rod_ is the protocol used by "intelligent clients" of an Infinispan Server, which implies
the client is smart enough to implement a series of performance optimisation tricks; for example
it is able to connect to the most suited server in the cluster depending on the data
being requested (or written), greatly reducing the latency of operations.

While Infinispan is most known as an high-performance key/value store, when it comes to remote
clients the recommended approach is to encode your data in Google Protobuffers.
This allows for evolution of your storage schema without breaking decoding of existing
data, allows server side queries and functions to interpret the stored data, and allows
interoperability with Hot Rod clients from other programming languages.
It allows for example to read the POJOs we write using the Java client from a Python client, and
have the data converted into reasonable Python Objects.

Unfortunately dealing with an Hot Rod client can be tedious!

* It's a key-value store: manual handling of relations is error prone
* You'll need to write and maintain a matching Protobuf Schema for all your entities
* You'll have to setup Protostream and configure it as Marshaller for the Hot Rod client

Most importantly, it requires new skills.

You'll have to learn how a Protobuf Schema is best defined, and how to use Protostream.
Finally, you'll have to learn the Hot Rod API and how to make the most of its
advanced flags to tune each operation, and consider carefully how you want to represent relations.

=== Use something familiar instead?

Hibernate OGM can automate the tedious parts, and let you focus on what matters.

==== Add this dependency:

[source, XML]
[subs="verbatim,attributes"]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.hibernate.ogm</groupId>
    <artifactId>hibernate-ogm-infinispan</artifactId>
    <version>5.1.0.Beta1</version>
</dependency>
----

==== Enable OGM's Hot Rod super powers in your persistence.xml :

====
[source, XML]
----
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<persistence xmlns="http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/persistence"
	xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
	xsi:schemaLocation="http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/persistence http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/persistence/persistence_2_0.xsd"
	version="2.0">

	<persistence-unit name="ogm-with-hotrod">
		<provider>org.hibernate.ogm.jpa.HibernateOgmPersistence</provider> # <1>
		<properties>
			<property name="hibernate.ogm.datastore.provider"
				value="infinispan_remote" /> # <2>
			<property name="hibernate.ogm.infinispan_remote.client.server_list"
				value="127.0.0.1:11222" /> # <3>
		</properties>
	</persistence-unit>
</persistence>
----
<1> Choose Hibernate OGM as JPA Provider
<2> pick `infinispan_remote` as datastore
<3> include Hot Rod configuration properties, just replacing/adding the OGM prefix.
====

==== Start Hibernate OGM!

====
[source, Java]
----
EntityManagerFactory emf = Persistence.createEntityManagerFactory("ogm-with-hotrod");
----
====

That's enough to create Hibernate `EntityManager`s which knows how to perform CRUD of your model,
encoding and decoding your data into Hot Rod!

This will:

 * Start and manage the Hot Rod client, have it initialize connections to your _Infinispan Server_
 * Generate an appropriate Protobuf Schema for your model
 * Deploy the schema to the _Infinispan Server_
 * Initialize all the internal Protobuf encoders and decoders using Protostream
 * Properly implement sequences / autoincrements (a feature lacking in native Hot Rod)

There are some limitations.

The most notable one is that you will have to manually create
the Cache definitions that it will need on your _Infinispan Server_ configuration, as
at this time this is an operation which can't be performed over Hot Rod (but the friendly
Infinispan team is working on a solution).

Another limitation is that at this time we don't support running JPQL queries on this backend.

You can find many more interesting details in our https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/ogm/5.1/reference/en-US/html/ch09.html[Infinispan integration reference guide]; I've included a section to help you choose between Infinispan Embedded
and Infinispan Remote (over Hot Rod).

Of course many more fixes made it into this release; for a full overview see the
https://github.com/hibernate/hibernate-ogm/blob/5.1.0.Beta1/changelog.txt[5.1.0.Beta1 changelog].

=== Hibernate OGM 5.0.3.Final

We also released Hibernate OGM version `5.0.3.Final`, to address a single mapping issue:
many thanks to Simone Manetti for http://stackoverflow.com/questions/40288481/persist-a-tree-with-hibernate-ogm-and-mongodb-the-collections-that-represent-th[reporting] https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/OGM-1198[OGM-1198], now resolved in this version.

Here is the full https://github.com/hibernate/hibernate-ogm/blob/5.0.3.Final/changelog.txt[5.0.3.Final changelog].

If you need to upgrade from a version before 5.0, you can find help in the
https://developer.jboss.org/wiki/HibernateOGMMigrationNotes[migration notes].

== What's next?

Version 5.1 is feature complete now. We're looking forward to your feedback!

==== How can I get in touch?

You can find us through the following channels:

* https://forum.hibernate.org/viewforum.php?f=31[User forum]
* https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/OGM[Issue tracker]
* http://lists.jboss.org/pipermail/hibernate-dev/[Mailing list]
* http://stackoverflow.com[Stack Overflow]: we monitor the tag _hibernate-ogm_
* https://www.hipchat.com/gXEjW5Wgg[HipChat]: Hibernate OGM hipchat room
