posts/Andrea/2022-10-28-hibernate-orm-615-final.adoc, before:

= "Hibernate ORM {released-version} released"
Andrea Boriero
:awestruct-tags: ["Hibernate ORM", "Releases"]
:awestruct-layout: blog-post
:released-version: 6.1.4.Final
:docs-url: https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.1
:migration-guide-url: {docs-url}/migration-guide/migration-guide.html
:user-guide-url: {docs-url}/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html
:release-id: 32113

Today, we published a new maintenance release of Hibernate ORM 6.1: {released-version}.

== What's new

This release introduces a few minor improvements as well as bug fixes.

=== Improvements

==== DB2 aliases

Hibernate schema validation now supports table aliases also for DB2, to enable this feature is necessary to set the `hibernate.synonyms` configuration property to `true` (see https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HHH-15585[15585])


=== Bugfixes

==== Hibernate Gradle Plugin

We have fixed two bugs affecting the Gradle plugin:

* A bug causing failures when trying to enhance entities has been fixed (see https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HHH-15597[HHH-15597])
* A bug preventing to execute tasks whose names consist of three or more parts, e.g. `compileThreePartNameJava` (see https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HHH-15558[HHH-15558])


==== Entity Graph and Inheritance

We have fixed a bug preventing to eager loading an association of a Single Table Inheritance (see https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HHH-15622[HHH-15622])

== Conclusion

For additional details, see:

- the link:{user-guide-url}[User Guide]
- the link:{migration-guide-url}[Migration Guide]
- the https://hibernate.org/orm/releases/6.1/[release page].


== Feedback, issues, ideas?

To get in touch, use the usual channels:

* https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/hibernate[**hibernate** tag on Stack Overflow] (usage questions)
* https://discourse.hibernate.org/c/hibernate-orm[User forum] (usage questions, general feedback)
* https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HHH[Issue tracker] (bug reports, feature requests)
* http://lists.jboss.org/pipermail/hibernate-dev/[Mailing list] (development-related discussions)

Commit message:

[ORM] 6.1.5.Final - edits and adding performance notes

posts/Andrea/2022-10-28-hibernate-orm-615-final.adoc, after:

= "Hibernate ORM {released-version} released"
Andrea Boriero
:awestruct-tags: ["Hibernate ORM", "Releases"]
:awestruct-layout: blog-post
:released-version: 6.1.5.Final
:docs-url: https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.1
:migration-guide-url: {docs-url}/migration-guide/migration-guide.html
:user-guide-url: {docs-url}/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html

Today, we published a new maintenance release of Hibernate ORM 6.1: {released-version}.

== What's new

This release introduces a few improvements, bug fixes, and a significant set of performance improvements.

=== Improvements

==== Performance

The Red Hat performance team has identified a particular pattern of code which triggers a severe performance penalty on large multi-core servers.
Many libraries have been found to be affected, including Hibernate ORM.

While the engineering team's primary goal will be to try address the JVM issue, tracked as https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8180450[JDK-8180450], we've
started to include some mitigation patches so that our users won't have to wait for years.

This work is in early phases and we're likely to follow up with additional related improvements, but if running on the HotSpot JVM and having multiple cores and using bytecode enhancements you should already experience improved CPU efficiency with this release.

Early tests are extremely promising!

In case you're interested to learn more, we discuss the problem extensively on https://youtu.be/G40VfIsnCdo[Quarkus Insights episode #107].

To figure out if your own code or other libraries are affected, use the https://github.com/RedHatPerf/type-pollution-agent[Type Pollution Agent].

The patch in Hibernate ORM was tracked as https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HHH-15616[HHH-15616] - more similar goodies are expected in further
upcoming releases.

N.B. this issue has been around for 20 years approximately: we're not facing a regression, I'd rather say it's an important discovery and coming
with terrific good news, assuming you care about the costs of your servers and/or the environment.

==== DB2 aliases

Hibernate schema validation now supports table aliases also for DB2, to enable this feature is necessary to set the `hibernate.synonyms` configuration property to `true` (see https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HHH-15585[15585])


=== Bugfixes

==== Hibernate Gradle Plugin

We have fixed two bugs affecting the Gradle plugin:

* A bug causing failures when trying to enhance entities has been fixed (see https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HHH-15597[HHH-15597])
* A bug preventing to execute tasks whose names consist of three or more parts, e.g. `compileThreePartNameJava` (see https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HHH-15558[HHH-15558])

These fixes are important for Spring Native.


==== Entity Graph and Inheritance

We have fixed a bug preventing to eager loading an association of a Single Table Inheritance (see https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HHH-15622[HHH-15622])

== Conclusion

For additional details, see:

- the link:{user-guide-url}[User Guide]
- the link:{migration-guide-url}[Migration Guide]
- the https://hibernate.org/orm/releases/6.1/[release page].


== Feedback, issues, ideas?

To get in touch, use the usual channels:

* https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/hibernate[**hibernate** tag on Stack Overflow] (usage questions)
* https://discourse.hibernate.org/c/hibernate-orm[User forum] (usage questions, general feedback)
* https://hibernate.atlassian.net/browse/HHH[Issue tracker] (bug reports, feature requests)
* http://lists.jboss.org/pipermail/hibernate-dev/[Mailing list] (development-related discussions)
